---
title: "Plans"
date: "2020-11-07T03:40:09+08:00"
draft: true
tags:
- Ramblings
---

So I recently handed in my resignation at my (former) job, and now I've got a
bunch of decisions to make.

I won't go into too much detail, but for me it was the typical problem of
being overworked and under-appreciated, and after a bit of introspection I
figured it was time to leave.

A big part of my plan was to deliberately *not* look for new work during my
notice period. I wanted to take a break to allow for personal development and
passion projects, and help recover a bit of [my lost enthusiasm][motivation]
free from external stressors.

I've been really lucky with my circumstances and can afford to spend a month
or two pursuing things that interest me. It's even better if those things
help show off my skills and abilities to prospective employers.

# Passion Projects

Often once you reach the intermediate-advanced level the only way to keep
developing your skills is by spending thousands of hours in the job. There's
a distinct lack of resources that help you learn the difference between a
professional software engineer and an ordinary coder.

About the best I've come across is [Jon Gjengset's streams on
YouTube][jon-youtube].

A lot of the content I post on this site tends to be once-off experiments or
extended tutorials, chock full of technical details and comments explaining
the thought process behind different choices. Although it often leads to
longer articles than most are willing to read, I personally really like this
format because it helps bridge that gap between newbie and expert. Funnily
enough, Jon explains this sentiment really well in [*Why are my videos so
damn long?!*][long-videos]

With that all said, I'd also like to have something more tangible to show for
my efforts and there are a couple larger projects I'd like to work on now
that I'm taking a "break".

A topic that really interests me is embedded systems and computational
geometry (using computers to do 2D or 3D maths), and I've been thinking of
ripping the control system out of a cheap 3D printer and implementing my own.

My main reservations are that 3D printers are already fairly mainstream so will
be quickly dismissed by people, and that *I don't actually need a 3D printer*
for anything I do.

Then I was perusing YouTube one day and ran across this really cool polar
plotter.

{{< youtube id="7_aS0PbP8HY" >}}

I really like the idea of a plotter because you get something novel at the
end, using polar coordinates will add a nice twist to the kinematics, and
there are lower expectations around precision so it's okay if I cut corners.

Hopefully you'll hear more about this over the next couple months.

# GitHub

# Career Prospects

# Long Term Goals

# Final Words


[motivation]: {{<ref "/posts/motivation.md" >}}
[jon-youtube]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_iD0xppBwwsrM9DegC5cQQ
[long-videos]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPbrI3xWdCg
